README.md, before:

# Patientor

Patientor is a full-stack TypeScript application for managing patient records. The backend exposes a REST API and the frontend provides a React UI for browsing patients and viewing details.

🔗 **Live Demo:** [fso-patientor-typescript.vercel.app](https://fso-patientor-typescript.vercel.app/)

## Features

- View a list of patients with key details
- Browse patient details and entries
- Client-side validation and typed API responses

## Tech stack

### Frontend

- React
- Vite
- TypeScript
- Material UI
- Axios

### Backend

- Node.js
- Express
- TypeScript
- Zod

## Project structure

- `back/` — Express API (TypeScript)
- `front/` — React + Vite client (TypeScript)
- `docs/` — project documentation and plans

## Prerequisites

- Node.js (current LTS recommended)
- npm

You will run the backend and frontend in separate terminals.

## Getting started

1) Install dependencies

```bash
cd back
npm install

cd ../front
npm install
```

2) Start the backend

```bash
cd back
npm run dev
```

3) Start the frontend

```bash
cd front
npm run dev
```

## Scripts

Backend (`back/`):

- `npm run dev` — start API in dev mode
- `npm run build` — build TypeScript
- `npm run start` — run built API
- `npm run lint` — lint
- `npm test` — tests

Frontend (`front/`):

- `npm run dev` — start Vite dev server
- `npm run build` — build production bundle
- `npm run preview` — preview build
- `npm run lint` — lint

## Troubleshooting

- If the frontend reports a ping failure, verify the backend is running and reachable at `/api/ping`.

Commit message:

added testing blurb to readme

README.md, after:

# Patientor

Patientor is a full-stack TypeScript application for managing patient records. The backend exposes a REST API and the frontend provides a React UI for browsing patients and viewing details.

🔗 **Live Demo:** [fso-patientor-typescript.vercel.app](https://fso-patientor-typescript.vercel.app/)

## Features

- View a list of patients with key details
- Browse patient details and entries
- Client-side validation and typed API responses

## Tech stack

### Frontend

- React
- Vite
- TypeScript
- Material UI
- Axios

### Backend

- Node.js
- Express
- TypeScript
- Zod

## Project structure

- `back/` — Express API (TypeScript)
- `front/` — React + Vite client (TypeScript)
- `docs/` — project documentation and plans

## Prerequisites

- Node.js (current LTS recommended)
- npm

You will run the backend and frontend in separate terminals.

## Getting started

1) Install dependencies

```bash
cd back
npm install

cd ../front
npm install
```

2) Start the backend

```bash
cd back
npm run dev
```

3) Start the frontend

```bash
cd front
npm run dev
```

## Scripts

Backend (`back/`):

- `npm run dev` — start API in dev mode
- `npm run build` — build TypeScript
- `npm run start` — run built API
- `npm run lint` — lint
- `npm test` — tests

Frontend (`front/`):

- `npm run dev` — start Vite dev server
- `npm run build` — build production bundle
- `npm run preview` — preview build
- `npm run lint` — lint

## Testing

Testing uses Node's built-in test runner with Supertest for backend API routes, plus lightweight unit tests in the frontend for typed service helpers and data mapping logic. The focus is on verifying API response shapes and entry creation behavior while keeping front-end tests centered on pure function outputs.

## Troubleshooting

- If the frontend reports a ping failure, verify the backend is running and reachable at `/api/ping`.
